
===== PAGE 1 =====
Chronological Synthesis of the Spherical
Substrate Line
Executive Summary
The newest PDF does not merely update the archive; it changes the interpretive rule for the whole
corpus. Its core instruction is to stop judging the archive as if it were fundamentally a proposal about
rasterization, ray marching, voxel storage, or a conventional frame loop. Instead, it argues that those
are downstream projection tools, while the actual proposal is an ontology of directly queryable
relations, events, phases, and identities. In that reading, the archive’s “cone,” “SDF = 0,” “one-bit,”
“double vacuum,” and “hourglass” motifs are not primarily graphics primitives. They are operators in a
shared state space. That is the decisive shift in the corpus. ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L20-L33
Read chronologically, the archive moves through a consistent arc. It begins with reaction-diﬀusion
balance, collapse, gradients, and distributed state; then introduces cone and polar language; then
develops a layered shared ontology for geometry, sensing, uncertainty, and semantics; then returns
obsessively to boundary, parity, persistence, and continuity-through-zero; and ﬁnally, in the 19 July
documents, recasts the whole project as a non-raster equation-world built from compatibility, event
solving, transition rules, lineage, and an irreducible event log. The latest PDF itself summarizes that
progression explicitly and treats its own contribution as a constructive correction: formalize the concept
on its own terms before comparing it to established engines or renderers. ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L54-
L76 ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L593-L604
The strongest uniﬁed concept is therefore not “replace all world structure with spheres” and not
“render the world by spherical raymarching.” It is a more speciﬁc claim: a ﬁnite grammar can generate a
continuous, phase-layered, event-driven state manifold in which local spherical or radial-angular
supports organize relevance, coupling, and measurement, while identities are preserved by lineage and
invariants rather than by instantaneous coordinates. In that concept, “spherical” is best understood as
the local substrate of support, shelling, orientation, and radial reach, not as a universal replacement for
every representation in the system. This interpretation matches the archive’s own mid-July corrections,
which repeatedly reject both “rasterized-everything” and “polar-everything” in favor of a layered or
query-driven ontology. ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L95-L118 ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L258-L301 (Polar
Coordinates as the Missing Local Chart for the Aerosol Cone Architecture.pdf, pp. 1–3) (Uniﬁed
Architecture for Aerosol Cone Sensing, SDFs, Nested Shells, and Spherical Kinematics.pdf, pp. 1–2)
(Hybrid Ontology for Unity 6.3.pdf, pp. 1–2)
On feasibility, the corpus is internally strongest when narrowed. The latest PDF is explicit that the most
defensible form is a restricted substrate that can answer state-at-time and next-event queries without
universal frame stepping, but only for controlled relation families. It also explicitly demotes the grander
claims—universal O(1), zero memory, world-equals-general-AI—from doctrine to research hypotheses.
That is the right reading of the corpus. Under that narrowed interpretation, the “spherical substrate
line” is feasible as a prototype-worthy computational medium. As a universal replacement for graphics,
simulation, memory, cognition, and semantics all at once, it remains unproven.
ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L40-L49 ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L366-L375 ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L579-
L592
1

===== PAGE 2 =====
A necessary assumption in the analysis below is that ambiguous corpus language should be interpreted
constructively: “sphere,” “cone,” “double vacuum,” “Klein bottle,” and “one-bit” are read as
computational variables, local charts, compatibility sectors, gluing rules, and routing bits unless the
documents explicitly insist on literal physics. That constructive translation is not imposed from outside;
it is exactly the move the latest PDF tells the reader to make. ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L30-L33
ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L123-L182
Chronological Corpus
The timeline below follows the chronology stated in the latest PDF’s “Chronological development” and
“Source basis” pages, then tightens it with the archive’s own ﬁlenames and page references. The archive
order matters because the core idea does not appear fully formed; it stabilizes through repeated
corrections. ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L54-L76 ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L593-L604
Date or
cohort
Core documents in the archive
What the
document
family is doing
Advance in
the
spherical
substrate
line
Where it
diverges or
slides back
Early July
Reaction-Diﬀusion-Collapse-Explained.pdf
(pp. 1–11)
Establishes
balance,
collapse,
hysteresis,
gradients,
topological
moats, and
distributed
state before
object
inventories
Introduces
the idea
that law-of-
change
precedes
object
storage;
world as
evolving
ﬁeld rather
than mesh
inventory
Still framed
through
explanatory
analogies and
simulation
language, not
yet a formal
substrate
Early July
posterize-shader-black-and-white-
dots...aerosol-spray-in-a-
cone...lighthouse.pdf (pp. 1–5, 25–33)
Starts from a
shader-and-
display
framing, then
partially
migrates
toward
compute-ﬁeld
language
Brings in
the cone as
directional
support and
the idea
that the
same ﬁeld
can serve
both display
and
machine
access
Repeatedly falls
back into
rendering
vocabulary,
especially
posterization,
dither, and
screen-space
discussion
2

===== PAGE 3 =====
Date or
cohort
Core documents in the archive
What the
document
family is doing
Advance in
the
spherical
substrate
line
Where it
diverges or
slides back
Early July
ﬁreﬂy-trapped-in-a-
sphere...cartesian...polar...relationship.pdf
(pp. 1–5, 9–11)
Establishes
radial/angular
organization,
manifold
language,
tangent
spaces, and
polar/spherical
transformation
imagery
Makes
“sphere”
and “polar”
native for
constrained
local motion
and support
Risks
overextending
coordinate
transforms into
metaphysical
universals
Mid July
shared
ontology
cohort
Polar Coordinates as the Missing Local
Chart... (pp. 1–3), Uniﬁed Architecture for
Aerosol Cone Sensing...Spherical
Kinematics.pdf (pp. 1–2), Hybrid
Ontology for Unity 6.3.pdf (pp. 1–2), 
Feasibility Assessment of the Brainstem
Concept.pdf (pp. 1–2)
Consolidates
the layered
stack: graph/
RD, SDF
geometry,
local cone
sensing,
localization,
fuzzy or
semantic lift
Critical
correction:
keep world
structure
hybrid or
geometric,
but make
local
sensing
radial-
angular;
“spherical”
becomes a
local chart,
not the
whole world
Still partly
anchored to
Unity, TSDF/
ESDF, shaders,
and
implementation
splits
Mid July
invariants
and
embodiment
cohort
Particle-Collisions-Explained-Bunches,-
Not-Single-Particles.pdf (pp. 1–5), 
GlagStone-1-Bit-City-Builder-Explained
(1).pdf (pp. 3–8), StepsWithout0.pdf (pp.
22, 27, 43–45), Cobalt_ The Immutable
Anchor...pdf (p. 1)
Develops one-
bit routing,
event crossing,
dt=0 rhetoric,
continuity-
through-zero,
and stable
anchors
Pushes the
archive
toward
threshold
semantics,
parity ﬂips,
zero-
crossings,
and
persistent
invariants
This cohort is
the most
metaphor-
heavy and least
disciplined; it
often confuses
visual style,
psychology,
and formal
mechanism
3

===== PAGE 4 =====
Date or
cohort
Core documents in the archive
What the
document
family is doing
Advance in
the
spherical
substrate
line
Where it
diverges or
slides back
Late July
hollowland-double-vacuum.pdf (pp. 29–
35, with pivot setup on pp. 6–8)
Explodes the
concept into
its grandest
form:
ontological
UUIDs, non-
sieved
algebraic
space,
hourglasses,
phase masks,
under-32 MB
worlds, AI/
world identity
Introduces
the full
vocabulary
later
normalized
by the
newest PDF:
phase, one-
bit, double
vacuum,
hourglass,
lineage, and
algebraic
event
persistence
Also makes the
archive’s least
controlled
claims,
especially
around O(1),
memory, and
universal
world/AI fusion
Late July
constructive
audit
Feasibility and Constructive Potential
Assessment of the Source Document.pdf
(pp. 1–7)
Separates
metaphor
from
implementable
mechanism
and
recommends a
much
narrower
prototype path
Converts
the archive
from
rhetoric into
falsiﬁable
program
fragments:
implicit
relations,
exact or
conservative
time-of-
impact,
grammar
layer, low-bit
state tags
Still interprets
much through
continuous
collision
detection and
engine
baselines
4

===== PAGE 5 =====
Date or
cohort
Core documents in the archive
What the
document
family is doing
Advance in
the
spherical
substrate
line
Where it
diverges or
slides back
Latest
attached
PDF
Beyond the Raster Trap Chronological
Synthesis (pp. 2–17)
Performs the
cleanest
internal
synthesis:
relation
algebra, phase
sheets,
compatibility,
event solving,
lineage,
irreducible
event log, and
Equation
World Zero
Finalizes the
through line
as a
declarative
state-and-
event
calculus
with local
spherical
support and
non-raster
semantics
Deliberately
brackets
external
validation, so it
establishes
internal
coherence
better than
external proof
What matters most in that sequence is the direction of correction. The archive ﬁrst tends to imagine
cones, spheres, and 1-bit transitions as graphics-adjacent or sensor-adjacent metaphors. The mid-July
analyses then insist that local radial-angular organization belongs mainly to sensing and support. The
19 July synthesis completes the move by treating the core as an event calculus in which rendering, if
used at all, is secondary. ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L24-L29 ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L97-L118
Uniﬁed Spherical Concept
The uniﬁed concept can be stated compactly:
A ﬁnite grammar generates a continuous state manifold whose locally spherical or
radial-angular supports deﬁne relevance, coupling, and measurement; events occur
when relations cross explicit transition surfaces under compatibility constraints;
identity persists by lineage and invariants rather than by coordinates; and
projection into images is optional, not constitutive. ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L34-L49
ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L564-L592
That statement is tighter than most individual source documents, but it is faithful to the corpus once
the late reframing is applied. The newest PDF deﬁnes the world as a ﬁnite grammar plus continuous
relations, phase sheets, invariants, and an irreducible event log. It also translates the archive’s recurring
vocabulary into operational terms: B = 0 becomes an event surface or transition relation, cones/
hourglasses become domains of inﬂuence or admissible relevance, phi becomes a phase law, one-bit
becomes routing or parity, double vacuum becomes phase-separated co-location, and ontological
address becomes lineage-based identity. ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L123-L182
ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L564-L583
The formal core proposed in the latest PDF is the clearest mathematical condensation in the corpus:
Q = P
×
n
R
×
time
S
×
phase
1
Z
×
2sheet
A
×
address
Bbranch
5

===== PAGE 6 =====
In plain language, a world state is not only “where in space,” but also “when,” “in what phase,” “on which
sheet,” “at which lineage-address,” and “on which branch.” Events are not pure geometry intersections;
they happen only when a relation is satisﬁed, the state lies inside the relevant support cone, and the co-
located sectors are compatible. ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L202-L230
The architecture diagram on page 6 makes the ontology especially clear: grammar and exogenous log
feed a projective-phase manifold; relations and compatibility operate inside that manifold; cone/
hourglass queries select relevance; and transitions update state while preserving invariants. The same
state description can then answer state-at-time, next-event, reachable-relation, identity, and agent-
action queries. That is why the through line is deeper than graphics. It proposes a common substrate
for physics-like transitions, sensing, persistence, and agency. ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L187-L197
The speciﬁcally spherical part of the line needs to be stated carefully. The archive’s strongest correction,
visible already in the mid-July analyses, is that spherical or polar structure belongs primarily to local
support, egocentric sensing, shell organization, radial reach, and phase coupling—not to a global
remeshing of all world state. Polar Coordinates as the Missing Local Chart for the Aerosol Cone Architecture
and Uniﬁed Architecture for Aerosol Cone Sensing, SDFs, Nested Shells, and Spherical Kinematics both insist
on that distinction: “keep the world model hybrid,” “make the sensor model polar,” and treat spherical
coordinates as native to the local manifold of cones, shells, and bilateral kernels rather than as a total
world replacement (Polar Coordinates..., pp. 1–3; Uniﬁed Architecture..., pp. 1–2). Hybrid Ontology for
Unity 6.3 makes the same point more bluntly: neither raster-everything nor polar-everything is the right
reading; persistent world state, local sensing, and display should remain distinct layers (Hybrid
Ontology..., pp. 1–2).
The archive’s best-developed singular notion is double vacuum. In the latest PDF it is given its cleanest
formulation: two states can share the same coordinate  yet still fail to interact because their phase,
sheet, orientation, or address are incompatible. The “second vacuum” is therefore not a stronger
emptiness; it is the absence of coupling. This is one of the core places where the corpus stops being
about visual metaphors and becomes a computational ontology. Same position does not imply same
sector. Interaction becomes explicitly gated. ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L235-L252
That page 8 diagram is useful because it shows how several recurrent archive motifs collapse into one
structure: the four chambers become a routing partition, the central pinch becomes a rank-changing
event locus, the vertical line becomes an invariant mode or eigen-axis, and the swept arc becomes
phase-controlled coupling. The image is not literal topology proof, but it is a disciplined visualization of
the actual computational claim. ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L238-L243 ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L245-L252
q (t) =
e
(x (t), t, ϕ (t), σ (t), a , b )
e
e
e
e
e
W = (G, R, T, I)
R (q; θ ) =
j
j
0,
C (q, t) ≤
α
0,
χ(e, j, t) ∈{0, 1}
t =
∗
min{t ≥t :
0
R (q (t)) =
j
e
0, C ≤
α
0, χ = 1}
q (t
) =
e
∗+
T (q (t
), context)
j
e
∗−
Architecture of the equation world from the latest PDF, page 6
x
Operational reading of double vacuum and the quad hourglass from the latest
PDF, page 8
6

===== PAGE 7 =====
One more correction is crucial. In StepsWithout0, the archive brieﬂy pushes toward the idea that an SDF
can “go past zero” into a spherical ﬂuid LUT and thereby bypass the frontend. But that same document
later admits that without a hard zero or natural cancellation surface, the system falls back into hidden
rasterization, because sampled approximation returns through the back door (StepsWithout0.pdf, pp.
22, 27, 43–45). The newest PDF solves that problem more cleanly: B = 0 is not “keep marching through a
rendered SDF”; it is the explicit transition relation where event semantics are invoked. That is a major
maturation of the corpus. ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L127-L137 ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L213-L214
The architecture can be summarized as follows:
flowchart LR
    G[Finite grammar G] --> Q[Projective-phase state manifold Q]
    L[Exogenous log L] --> Q
    Q --> R[Relations R_j(q)=0]
    Q --> C[Cone or hourglass support C(q,t)<=0]
    Q --> X[Compatibility χ phase/sheet/address]
    R --> E[Event time t*]
    C --> E
    X --> E
    E --> T[Transition T_j]
    T --> O[Outputs: state-at-time, next-event, identity, reachable relation, 
agent action]
This is why the corpus’s mature through line is best called a spherical-support event calculus rather
than a graphics alternative. The sphere, shell, cone, and hourglass motifs are not there to win a
renderer war. They are there to deﬁne local supports, sectors, and transitions in a shared state space.
ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L258-L301
Feasibility
What is realistically feasible
Under the latest PDF’s intended interpretation, the concept is strongest at the lower rungs of its own
feasibility ladder: relational representation, phase-layered state, and direct state/event queries over
restricted relation families. The report’s overall verdict is explicit: the architecture is conceptually
coherent and prototype-feasible as a restricted equation-world substrate, while its scale and generality
remain open research questions. That distinction should be treated as the authoritative internal
feasibility judgment of the corpus. ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L366-L375
The most defensible restricted prototype is already speciﬁed as Equation World Zero. It uses 2D
homogeneous coordinates plus continuous time, two sheets and one orientation bit, four-chamber
routing at 
, a tightly bounded relation family, simple trajectory classes, ﬁnite grammar depth,
lineage-based identity, and symbolic state/event outputs rather than image-ﬁrst ambitions. That is a
healthy prototype design because it puts the burden where the concept actually lives: state evaluation,
compatibility, event solving, routing, and persistence. ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L477-L503
B = 0
7

===== PAGE 8 =====
Computational complexity
The latest PDF oﬀers a narrow and useful reinterpretation of the archive’s O(1) rhetoric. It does not
claim universal constant cost. It claims only that, for a ﬁxed closed expression, the cost of asking for
state at time  can be independent of the number of skipped time steps. Similarly, next-event cost is
dominated by compatibility checks, event solving, and branch resolution, not by frame replay. That is a
strong claim, but it is much weaker than “constant-cost universe,” and much more plausible.
ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L224-L230 ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L445-L449
A practical cost picture, using the corpus’s own terms, looks like this:
Query or
operation
Dominant cost under
the intended model
Why it can beat frame
stepping
Why it can still fail
state_at(t)
Evaluate closed state
expression 
Cost can be horizon-
independent for ﬁxed
expressions
Expression size can grow
with grammar depth or
branch history
next_event
Compatibility + root/
event solve + branch
resolution
Avoids replaying all
intermediate states
Event density, multiple
roots, and degeneracies
can explode
Cone query
Support pruning +
relation evaluation
inside support
Relevance is localized
analytically, not by
rendering an image
Poor compatibility ﬁlters
turn cone queries into
broad scans
Persistence
rebuild
Seed + grammar +
external event log
Closed dynamics can be
recomputed instead of
stored frame-by-frame
Exogenous novelty still
accumulates and must
be logged
Identity
reconstruction
Generative address +
invariant history
Avoids relying on current
coordinate as unique
identity
Splits, merges, and
reconciliations need
explicit lineage rules
This table is not imported from outside. It is a direct synthesis of the formal core, the “precise meaning
of O(1),” the claim-by-claim assessment, and the evaluation program in the latest PDF.
ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L202-L230 ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L380-L450 ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L507-
L559
The key feasibility criterion on page 14 is especially important: the architecture only succeeds if the cost
of compatibility plus event solving grows more slowly than the amount of world structure the system
avoids explicitly materializing. That is the real computational test. Not whether it “sounds unlike
rasterization,” but whether its pruning and solvability dominate its combinatorics.
ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L455-L470
Numerical stability
The newest PDF is unusually candid about numerical fragility. It ﬂags long time horizons, log
coordinates, irrational phase schedules, near-singular operators, tangencies, coincident surfaces, and
rank changes as actual engineering risks. That list is not incidental; it tells us exactly where the
prototype can fail while still being internally faithful to the concept. If the substrate relies on phase,
t
q (t)
e
8

===== PAGE 9 =====
singular centers, and event surfaces, then conditioning is not a side issue. It is part of the ontology.
ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L463-L466
This is where the corpus’s mature form is notably better than its earlier rhetoric. Earlier material often
implied that spherical organization or 1-bit transitions would automatically bypass computational
hardness. The latest PDF rejects that magical reading. It explicitly allows interval or set-valued answers,
certiﬁed numerical root processes, and pragmatic uncertainty semantics. That is the right stance for a
real prototype. ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L221-L230 ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L289-L297
Hardware implications
The corpus now supports two implementation pathways, and they should not be confused.
The ﬁrst is the query-ﬁrst headless path favored by the latest PDF. Start from algebra, compatibility,
events, transitions, identities, and logs. Do not begin by rebuilding a conventional scene or image
pipeline and then claiming victory if it looks clever. The latest PDF is direct that “success is not a picture,”
and that visual ﬁdelity cannot deﬁne the prototype. ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L492-L500
ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L507-L559 ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L588-L592
The second is the hybrid engine path developed in the mid-July archive analyses. Those documents
consistently recommend a split in which authoritative world geometry and belief remain in a stable
geometric or graph-backed core, while cone integration, display-focused volumetrics, or optional
raymarching live in a secondary compute stage. This is a feasible engineering bridge, but it is already a
concession to conventional engine structure. It is useful as a bootstrap path, not as the purest
statement of the idea (Hybrid Ontology for Unity 6.3.pdf, pp. 1–2; Aerosol Cone Vision in the Uniﬁed
Engine.pdf, pp. 1–2; Aerosol Volumetrics Inside a Uniﬁed Engine Architecture.pdf, pp. 1–2).
The hardware lesson is therefore simple: if the goal is to test the core principles, use the headless
algebraic path ﬁrst. If the goal is to productize a stepping stone inside a game engine, the hybrid path is
the safer bridge. The corpus supports both, but it clearly treats the ﬁrst as the truer experiment.
ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L477-L503 ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L544-L559
Comparison to Rasterization, Raymarching, and Tracing
The latest PDF identiﬁes the trap precisely: a proposal about representation gets translated too quickly
into a proposal about drawing. Then the cone becomes rays, the one-bit state becomes pixels, 
becomes a sampled volume, and grammar becomes mesh generation. The report argues that this
translation can be useful yet still erase the intended inversion. That paragraph is the cleanest internal
statement of how the proposed substrate diﬀers from the familiar pipelines. ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L24-
L29
The comparison becomes clearer when framed as “what question is the system trying to answer?”
System
Basic question it
answers
Why it overlaps with the
corpus
Why it is not the corpus’s core
idea
Rasterization
How do stored
surfaces project into
pixels this frame?
The corpus can still emit
images as downstream
projections
The latest PDF explicitly
rejects taking the projection
as the world itself
B = 0
9

===== PAGE 10 =====
System
Basic question it
answers
Why it overlaps with the
corpus
Why it is not the corpus’s core
idea
Raymarching
What does repeated
ﬁeld sampling along
projected directions
reveal?
The corpus often uses
SDF language and cone
imagery that tempt this
reading
The mature concept replaces
repeated sampling with
compatibility, event solving,
and transition semantics
Ray tracing
Which transport or
visibility paths
connect a point,
source, or eye
through space?
Cones, visibility, and
support domains can
later be rendered or
traced
The latest PDF redeﬁnes
cones as causal, semantic,
collision, memory, and
grammar supports, not just
light transport
Proposed
substrate
What state holds at
time , what event
happens next, and
which sectors can
couple?
Uses implicit geometry,
supports, invariants,
and local charts that can
be projected if desired
Treats representation as a
directly queryable relation
algebra and event calculus
The underlying inversion appears in the latest PDF’s “Default pipeline question / Equation-world
question” table. Traditional questions ask what geometry must be stored, what updates every frame,
and how sensors obtain images. The equation-world version asks what ﬁnite relations generate
possible states, what the state is at time , what the next event is after 
, and what events fall inside an
analytic domain of dependence. That is not a minor implementation tweak. It is a shift in ontology.
ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L101-L118
This also explains the overlap. The corpus does not require hostility to rasterization, raymarching, or
tracing as techniques. It only refuses to let them deﬁne the substrate. The latest PDF explicitly says
those can remain downstream projection tools. In that sense, the relationship is not “mutual exclusion.”
It is “do not mistake the projector for the state space.” ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L20-L23
The archive itself illustrates both the confusion and the correction. The posterize/aerosol/lighthouse
material starts close to a shader or volumetric eﬀect framing, and parts of StepsWithout0 still imagine
the breakthrough as “getting past zero” without sampling. But the mid-July architectural reports already
push back, saying the cone should be treated as a sensing or support operator over a shared manifold,
not as a rendering trick; and the newest PDF completes that correction by naming cones “analytic
relevance operators” that unify causality, collision, memory retrieval, and procedural unfolding without
turning them into visual rays. ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L260-L300 (posterize-shader...aerosol-spray-in-a-
cone...lighthouse.pdf, pp. 1–5, 29–33) (StepsWithout0.pdf, pp. 22, 43–45) (Aerosol Cones, SDFs, and
Matryoshka Nesting in the Uniﬁed Engine.pdf, pp. 1–2, 5)
So, on the user’s central concern: yes, the corpus’s through line is fundamentally diﬀerent from
rasterization and raymarching when read at the level the latest PDF demands. The diﬀerence lies less
in sphere-vs-grid geometry and more in query-vs-projection semantics. Rasterization and
raymarching ask how to sample or draw. The spherical substrate line asks how to organize support,
compatibility, and transitions so that state and event can be queried directly. ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L95-
L118 ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L194-L197
t
t
t0
10

===== PAGE 11 =====
Risks and Experiments
The latest PDF’s bottleneck list is the most valuable research agenda in the corpus because it names the
places where the idea could fail without falling back into a graphics benchmark. The real hazards are
algebraic closure, event explosion, branch explosion, degeneracies, conditioning, exogenous entropy,
identity under split/merge, self-reference, semantic grounding, and query governance. Those are
exactly the right risks for this kind of architecture. ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L455-L470
From those bottlenecks, the most important open questions become clear.
First, can grammar composition stay inside a closed or normalized relation family, or does the
expression size grow until direct query loses any advantage? That is the core algebra question. Second,
can compatibility predicates remove enough candidate events to keep solving sparse? That is the
scaling question. Third, can lineage survive splits, merges, and reconciliations without devolving into ad
hoc bookkeeping? That is the identity question. Fourth, can the shared world/agent ontology carry
actual semantics rather than just colocated tensors and phase tags? That is the cognitive question. And
ﬁfth, can all of that remain numerically stable in the presence of singularities and long horizons? That is
the implementation question. ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L368-L375 ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L382-L450
ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L455-L470
The archive already contains a strong prototype program. The ﬁrst phase should revolve around six
required queries: state at time, next event, events in cone, phase coupling of co-located sheets,
transition routing through the hourglass or gluing rule, and persistence/identity reconstruction from
seed plus external log. Those six queries are the right minimal experiment because together they test
directness, support semantics, compatibility, routing, lineage, and memory discipline.
ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L492-L503
A disciplined ﬁrst-wave experiment set would look like this:
Prototype
experiment
What it tests
Evidence of success
Horizon
skipping
Whether state_at(t)  cost scales
with skipped time or only with
expression complexity
Query cost stays tied to expression
size, not elapsed steps
Co-located
phase sheets
Whether double vacuum is a real
compatibility sector and not just
duplicated coordinates
Same-  states remain uncoupled until
explicit compatibility is met
Event routing
at 
Whether transitions preserve
invariants while routing across sheets
or chambers
Correct event ordering and stable
invariant tags
Grammar
depth stress
Whether direct-query advantages
survive rule composition
Growth stays bounded or
normalizable within the allowed
relation family
Identity split/
merge
Whether generative address can
survive nontrivial persistence
operations
Lineage collisions are detectable and
reconstructable
x
B = 0
11

===== PAGE 12 =====
Prototype
experiment
What it tests
Evidence of success
Minimal agent
integration
Whether action, memory, and
perception can reuse the same
relation substrate
Agent queries and action selection
operate in the same transition
language as embodiment
Those experiments are not speculative additions by me; they directly condense the latest PDF’s own
evaluation program and exit criteria. ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L512-L559
A clean prototype ﬂow looks like this:
The most important recommendation for a proof of concept is therefore to refuse two temptations.
The ﬁrst temptation is to turn the experiment immediately into a renderer benchmark. The second
temptation is to preserve the archive’s most inﬂated claims as requirements. The proper goal is
narrower: show that one nontrivial relation family can answer state-at-time and next-event queries
without stepping every frame, under explicit compatibility, with stable lineage, bounded expression
growth, and memory proportional to novelty rather than to geometric extent. If that works, the
prototype has validated the core of the spherical substrate line. If it fails, the failure will be informative
in exactly the right place. ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L544-L559
The corpus’s own ﬁnal decision is the correct closing judgment: GO for formalization and Equation
World Zero, but do not begin by recreating a conventional scene or image pipeline. Begin with the
algebra of state, compatibility, event, transition, identity, and memory.
ﬁleciteturn0ﬁle0L588-L592
Finite grammar
State evaluator
Compatibility filter
Event solver
Transition router
Lineage and invariant
update
Query outputs and
external log
12
